.. rubric:: About Python Module of the Week

PyMOTW is a series of blog posts written by `Doug Hellmann
<http://www.doughellmann.com/>`_.  It was started as a way to build
the habit of writing something on a regular basis.  The focus of the
series is building a set of example code for the modules in the
`Python <http://www.python.org/>`_ standard library.

Complete documentation for the standard library can be found on the
Python web site at http://docs.python.org/library/contents.html.

.. rubric:: Tools

The source text for PyMOTW is `reStructuredText
<http://docutils.sourceforge.net/>`_ and the HTML and PDF output are
created using `Sphinx <http://sphinx.pocoo.org/>`_.

.. rubric:: Subscribe

As new articles are written, they are posted to `my blog
<http://blog.doughellmann.com/>`_. Updates are available by `RSS
<http://feeds.feedburner.com/PyMOTW>`_ and `email
<http://www.feedburner.com/fb/a/emailverifySubmit?feedId=806224&amp;loc=en_US>`_. See
the project home page for details
(http://www.doughellmann.com/PyMOTW/).

.. rubric:: Translations and Other Versions

Junjie Cai and Yan Sheng have started a google code project called
PyMOTWCN (http://code.google.com/p/pymotwcn/) and posted the completed
translations at http://www.vbarter.cn/pymotw/.

Ralf Sch√∂nian is translating PyMOTW into German, following an
alphabetical order.  The results are available on his web site,
http://schoenian-online.de/pymotw.html.  Ralf is an active member of
the `pyCologne
<http://wiki.python.de/User_Group_K%C3%B6ln?action=show&redirect=pyCologne>`_
user group in Germany and author of pyVoc, the open source
English/German vocabulary trainer (http://code.google.com/p/pyvoc/).

Roberto Pauletto is working on an Italian translation at
http://robyp.x10hosting.com/.  Roberto creates Windows applications
with C# by day, and tinkers with Linux and Python at home.  He has
recently moved to Python from Perl for all of his
system-administration scripting.

`Ernesto Rico Schmidt <http://denklab.org/>`_ provides a Spanish
translation that follows the English version posts. Ernesto is in
Bolivia, and is translating these examples as a way to contribute to
the members of the `Bolivian Free Software
<http://www.softwarelibre.org.bo/>`_ community who use Python.  The
full list of articles available in Spanish can be found at
http://denklab.org/articles/category/pymotw/, and there is an `RSS
feed <http://denklab.org/feeds/articles/category/pymotw/>`_.

`Tetsuya Morimoto <http://d.hatena.ne.jp/t2y-1979/>`_ is creating a
Japanese translation. Tetsuya has used Python for 1.5 years. He has as
experience at a Linux Distributor using Python with yum, anaconda, and
rpm-tools while building RPM packages. Now, he uses it to make useful
tools for himself, and is interested in application frameworks such as
Django, mercurial and wxPython. Tetsuya is a member of `Python Japan
User's Group <http://www.python.jp/Zope/>`_ and `Python Code Reading
<http://groups.google.co.jp/group/python-code-reading>`_. The home
page for his translation is
http://d.hatena.ne.jp/t2y-1979/20090525/1243227350.

Gerard Flanagan is working on a "Python compendium" called `The Hazel
Tree <http://www.thehazeltree.org/>`_.  He is converting a collection
of old and new of Python-related reference material into
reStructuredText and then building a single searchable repository from
the results.  I am very pleased to have PyMOTW included with works
from authors like Mark Pilgrim, Fredrik Lundh, Andrew Kuchling, and a
growing list of others.

.. rubric:: Other Contributors

Thank you to John Benediktsson for the original HTML-to-reST
conversion.

.. rubric:: Copyright

All of the prose from the Python Module of the Week is licensed under
a `Creative Commons Attribution, Non-commercial, Share-alike 3.0
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/us/>`_ license.  You
are free to share and create derivative works from it.  If you post
the material online, you must give attribution and link to the PyMOTW
home page (http://www.doughellmann.com/PyMOTW/).  You may not use this
work for commercial purposes.  If you alter, transform, or build upon
this work, you may distribute the resulting work only under the same
or similar license to this one.

The source code included here is copyright Doug Hellmann and licensed
under the BSD license.

    Copyright Doug Hellmann, All Rights Reserved
    
    Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and
    its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
    granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all
    copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission
    notice appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of Doug
    Hellmann not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to
    distribution of the software without specific, written prior
    permission.
    
    DOUG HELLMANN DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE,
    INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN
    NO EVENT SHALL DOUG HELLMANN BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR
    CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS
    OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
    NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN
    CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2
    
    articles/index
    builtins
    string_services
    data_types
    numeric
    internet_data
    file_formats
    cryptographic
    file_access
    compression
    persistence
    generic_os
    optional_os
    unix
    ipc
    internet_protocols
    markup
    i18n
    frameworks
    dev_tools
    profilers
    runtime_services
    importing
    miscelaneous
    history
