'\" t
.\"
.\" mpatrol
.\" A library for controlling and tracing dynamic memory allocations.
.\" Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.\"
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Library General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License along with this library; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston,
.\" MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" UNIX Manual Page
.\"
.\" $Id: hexwords.1,v 1.7 2002/01/08 20:28:41 graeme Exp $
.\"
.TH HEXWORDS 1 "8 January 2002" "Release 1.4" "mpatrol library"
.SH NAME
hexwords \- extracts any words from a file that can be written as hex numbers
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBhexwords\fP [\fIoptions\fP] [\fIdictfile\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBhexwords\fP command is a little tool that can be used to generate
hexadecimal constants from a dictionary of known words.  Such numerical
constants can be used in source files for a variety of debugging problems, and
problems with uninitialised variables are especially relevant since these
special numbers will stand out if seen from within a debugger.  For example,
here are some common (and some not-so-common) 32-bit hexadecimal constants that
can be used as debugging aids:

.TS
r l.
\fIword\fP	\fIhex constant\fP
addedbad	0xaddedbad
allocate	0xa110ca7e
badlabel	0xbad1abe1
baseball	0xba5eba11
codebabe	0xc0debabe
codedbad	0xc0dedbad
deadbeef	0xdeadbeef
deadcode	0xdeadc0de
failsafe	0xfa115afe
feedface	0xfeedface
freedata	0xf4eeda7a
goodcode	0x600dc0de
.TE
.PP
As can be seen above, many decimal digits can be used to represent the letters
that they most closely resemble, along with the hexadecimal digits \fIA\fP
through \fPF\fP.  This provides a much larger selection of words that can be
matched, although the digits \fI3\fP and \fI8\fP cannot be used due to the lack
of any similar-looking letters.  The digits and their corresponding letters are
given in the following table.

.TS
l l.
\fIdigit\fP	\fIletter\fP
0	O, o or Q
1	I, i or l
2	Z or z
3	-
4	q or R
5	S or s
6	G
7	J or T
8	-
9	g
A-F	A-F
a-f	a-f
.TE
.PP
The \fIdictfile\fP argument must be a valid dictionary filename but if
\fIdictfile\fP is omitted then \fBhexwords\fP will use \fI/usr/dict/words\fP as
the name of the dictionary file to use.  If that cannot be found then
\fBhexwords\fP will try \fI/usr/lib/dict/words\fP and
\fI/usr/share/dict/words\fP.  The dictionary file must be a plain text file
that contains one word per line, otherwise few to no words will be matched.
.PP
The \fBhexwords\fP command currently makes use of several UNIX text processing
commands in order to extract the words and their hexadecimal equivalents.  As a
result, the \fBhexwords\fP command is only likely to work on UNIX platforms or
on systems which have the necessary commands installed.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fP [\fB\-h\fP]
Displays a quick-reference option summary.
.TP
\fB\-\-match\fP <\fIexact\fP|\fIlower\fP|\fIupper\fP|\fIany\fP> [\fB\-m\fP]
Sets the type of case-sensitivity to use.  A setting of \fIexact\fP performs a
case-sensitive comparison of all of the words in the dictionary file and the
hexadecimal digits, whereas a setting of \fIany\fP does not.  The \fIlower\fP
and \fIupper\fP settings convert the words in the dictionary file to lower and
upper case respectively before performing a case-sensitive comparison.  The
default case-sensitivity is \fIexact\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-maximum\fP <\fIcount\fP> [\fB\-u\fP]
Sets the maximum number of letters to match.  None of the hexadecimal numbers
displayed will have any more digits than this.  The default is \fI8\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-minimum\fP <\fIcount\fP> [\fB\-l\fP]
Sets the minimum number of letters to match.  None of the hexadecimal numbers
displayed will have any less digits than this.  The default is \fI4\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fP [\fB\-V\fP]
Displays the version number of the \fBhexwords\fP command.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmpatrol\fP(1), \fBmprof\fP(1), \fBmptrace\fP(1), \fBmleak\fP(1),
\fBmpsym\fP(1), \fBmpedit\fP(1), \fBlibmpatrol\fP(3), \fBlibmpalloc\fP(3).
.PP
The mpatrol manual and reference card.
.PP
http://www.cbmamiga.demon.co.uk/mpatrol/
.SH AUTHOR
Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.PP
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.
.PP
This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Library General Public License for more
details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public License
along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
