.\" mpatrol
.\" A library for controlling and tracing dynamic memory allocations.
.\" Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.\"
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Library General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License along with this library; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston,
.\" MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" UNIX Manual Page
.\"
.\" $Id: mpatrol.1,v 1.42 2002/01/08 20:28:41 graeme Exp $
.\"
.TH MPATROL 1 "8 January 2002" "Release 1.4" "mpatrol library"
.SH NAME
mpatrol \- runs programs using the mpatrol library
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmpatrol\fP [\fIoptions\fP] <\fIcommand\fP> [\fIarguments\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBmpatrol\fP command is used to set various mpatrol library \fIoptions\fP
when running \fIcommand\fP with its \fIarguments\fP.  In most cases,
\fIcommand\fP must have been linked with the mpatrol library, unless the
\fI\-\-dynamic\fP option is used in which case \fIcommand\fP need only have been
dynamically linked.
.PP
All mpatrol library diagnostics are sent to the file \fImpatrol.%n.log\fP in the
current directory by default (where \fI%n\fP is the current process id) but this
can be changed using the \fB\-\-log\-file\fP option.  Similarly, the default
profiling output filename is \fImpatrol.%n.out\fP and the default tracing output
filename is \fImpatrol.%n.trace\fP.
.SH OPTIONS
All of the following options (except \fB\-\-dynamic\fP, \fB\-\-help\fP,
\fB\-\-read\-env\fP, \fB\-\-show\-env\fP, \fB\-\-threads\fP and
\fB\-\-version\fP) correspond to their listed mpatrol library option.  See
\fBlibmpatrol\fP(3) for more details on these options.
.TP
\fB\-\-alloc\-byte\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-a\fP]
[\fBALLOCBYTE\fP]  Specifies an 8-bit byte pattern with which to prefill
newly-allocated memory.
.TP
\fB\-\-alloc\-stop\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-A\fP]
[\fBALLOCSTOP\fP]  Specifies an allocation index at which to stop the program
when it is being allocated.
.TP
\fB\-\-allow\-oflow\fP [\fB\-M\fP]
[\fBALLOWOFLOW\fP]  Specifies that a warning rather than an error should be
produced if any memory operation function overflows the boundaries of a memory
allocation, and that the operation should still be performed.
.TP
\fB\-\-auto\-save\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-s\fP]
[\fBAUTOSAVE\fP]  Specifies the frequency at which to periodically write the
profiling data to the profiling output file.
.TP
\fB\-\-check\fP <\fIunsigned range\fP> [\fB\-c\fP]
[\fBCHECK\fP]  Specifies a range of allocation indices at which to check the
integrity of free memory and overflow buffers.
.TP
\fB\-\-check\-all\fP [\fB\-C\fP]
[\fBCHECKALL\fP]  Equivalent to the \fB\-\-check\-allocs\fP,
\fB\-\-check\-reallocs\fP, \fB\-\-check\-frees\fP and \fB\-\-check\-memory\fP
options specified together.
.TP
\fB\-\-check\-allocs\fP
[\fBCHECKALLOCS\fP]  Checks that no attempt is made to allocate a block of
memory of size zero.
.TP
\fB\-\-check\-fork\fP
[\fBCHECKFORK\fP]  Checks at every call to see if the process has been forked in
case new log, profiling and tracing output files need to be started.
.TP
\fB\-\-check\-frees\fP
[\fBCHECKFREES\fP]  Checks that no attempt is made to deallocate a \fBNULL\fP
pointer.
.TP
\fB\-\-check\-memory\fP
[\fBCHECKMEMORY\fP]  Checks that no attempt is made to perform a zero-length
memory operation on a \fBNULL\fP pointer.
.TP
\fB\-\-check\-reallocs\fP
[\fBCHECKREALLOCS\fP]  Checks that no attempt is made to reallocate a \fBNULL\fP
pointer or resize an existing block of memory to size zero.
.TP
\fB\-\-def\-align\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-D\fP]
[\fBDEFALIGN\fP]  Specifies the default alignment for general-purpose memory
allocations, which must be a power of two.
.TP
\fB\-\-dynamic\fP [\fB\-d\fP]
Specifies that programs which were not linked with the mpatrol library should
also be traced, but only if they were dynamically linked.  This option will
only work if the system dynamic linker has the ability to preload a set of
user-specified shared libraries via a special environment variable.
.TP
\fB\-\-edit\fP [\fB\-e\fP]
[\fBEDIT\fP]  Specifies that a text editor should be invoked to edit any
relevant source files that are associated with any warnings or errors when they
occur.
.TP
\fB\-\-fail\-freq\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-q\fP]
[\fBFAILFREQ\fP]  Specifies the frequency at which all memory allocations will
randomly fail.
.TP
\fB\-\-fail\-seed\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-Q\fP]
[\fBFAILSEED\fP]  Specifies the random number seed which will be used when
determining which memory allocations will randomly fail.
.TP
\fB\-\-free\-byte\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-f\fP]
[\fBFREEBYTE\fP]  Specifies an 8-bit byte pattern with which to prefill
newly-freed memory.
.TP
\fB\-\-free\-stop\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-F\fP]
[\fBFREESTOP\fP]  Specifies an allocation index at which to stop the program
when it is being freed.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fP [\fB\-h\fP]
Displays a quick-reference option summary.
.TP
\fB\-\-large\-bound\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP>
[\fBLARGEBOUND\fP]  Specifies the limit in bytes up to which memory allocations
should be classified as large allocations for profiling purposes.
.TP
\fB\-\-leak\-table\fP
[\fBLEAKTABLE\fP] Specifies that the leak table should be automatically used
and a leak table summary should be displayed at the end of program execution.
.TP
\fB\-\-limit\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-u\fP]
[\fBLIMIT\fP]  Specifies the limit in bytes at which all memory allocations
should fail if the total allocated memory should increase beyond this.
.TP
\fB\-\-list\fP [\fB\-i\fP]
[\fBLIST\fP]  Specifies that a context listing should be shown for any relevant
source files that are associated with any warnings or errors when they occur.
.TP
\fB\-\-log\-all\fP [\fB\-L\fP]
[\fBLOGALL\fP]  Equivalent to the \fB\-\-log\-allocs\fP,
\fB\-\-log\-reallocs\fP, \fB\-\-log\-frees\fP and \fB\-\-log\-memory\fP options
specified together.
.TP
\fB\-\-log\-allocs\fP
[\fBLOGALLOCS\fP]  Specifies that all memory allocations are to be logged and
sent to the log file.
.TP
\fB\-\-log\-file\fP <\fIstring\fP> [\fB\-l\fP]
[\fBLOGFILE\fP]  Specifies an alternative file in which to place all diagnostics
from the mpatrol library.
.TP
\fB\-\-log\-frees\fP
[\fBLOGFREES\fP]  Specifies that all memory deallocations are to be logged and
sent to the log file.
.TP
\fB\-\-log\-memory\fP
[\fBLOGMEMORY\fP]  Specifies that all memory operations are to be logged and
sent to the log file.
.TP
\fB\-\-log\-reallocs\fP
[\fBLOGREALLOCS\fP]  Specifies that all memory reallocations are to be logged
and sent to the log file.
.TP
\fB\-\-medium\-bound\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP>
[\fBMEDIUMBOUND\fP]  Specifies the limit in bytes up to which memory allocations
should be classified as medium allocations for profiling purposes.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-free\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-n\fP]
[\fBNOFREE\fP]  Specifies that a number of recently-freed memory allocations
should be prevented from being returned to the free memory pool.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-protect\fP [\fB\-N\fP]
[\fBNOPROTECT\fP]  Specifies that the mpatrol library's internal data structures
should not be made read-only after every memory allocation, reallocation or
deallocation.
.TP
\fB\-\-oflow\-byte\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-o\fP]
[\fBOFLOWBYTE\fP]  Specifies an 8-bit byte pattern with which to fill the
overflow buffers of all memory allocations.
.TP
\fB\-\-oflow\-size\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-O\fP]
[\fBOFLOWSIZE\fP]  Specifies the size in bytes to use for all overflow buffers,
which must be a power of two.
.TP
\fB\-\-oflow\-watch\fP [\fB\-w\fP]
[\fBOFLOWWATCH\fP]  Specifies that watch point areas should be used for overflow
buffers rather than filling with the overflow byte.
.TP
\fB\-\-page\-alloc\-lower\fP [\fB\-b\fP]
[\fBPAGEALLOC\fP=\fILOWER\fP]  Specifies that each individual memory allocation
should occupy at least one page of virtual memory and should be placed at the
lowest point within these pages.
.TP
\fB\-\-page\-alloc\-upper\fP [\fB\-B\fP]
[\fBPAGEALLOC\fP=\fIUPPER\fP]  Specifies that each individual memory allocation
should occupy at least one page of virtual memory and should be placed at the
highest point within these pages.
.TP
\fB\-\-preserve\fP [\fB\-v\fP]
[\fBPRESERVE\fP]  Specifies that any reallocated or freed memory allocations
should preserve their original contents.
.TP
\fB\-\-prof\fP [\fB\-p\fP]
[\fBPROF\fP]  Specifies that all memory allocations are to be profiled and sent
to the profiling output file.
.TP
\fB\-\-prof\-file\fP <\fIstring\fP> [\fB\-P\fP]
[\fBPROFFILE\fP]  Specifies an alternative file in which to place all memory
allocation profiling information from the mpatrol library.
.TP
\fB\-\-prog\-file\fP <\fIstring\fP> [\fB\-r\fP]
[\fBPROGFILE\fP]  Specifies an alternative filename with which to locate the
executable file containing the program's symbols.
.TP
\fB\-\-read\-env\fP [\fB\-I\fP]
Reads and passes through the contents of the \fBMPATROL_OPTIONS\fP environment
variable.  Such contents will be placed before any of the options resulting from
\fBmpatrol\fP command line options so that they can be overridden and will only
be parsed by the mpatrol library, \fInot\fP the \fBmpatrol\fP command.
.TP
\fB\-\-realloc\-stop\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-R\fP]
[\fBREALLOCSTOP\fP]  Specifies an allocation index at which to stop the program
when a memory allocation is being reallocated.
.TP
\fB\-\-safe\-signals\fP [\fB\-G\fP]
[\fBSAFESIGNALS\fP]  Instructs the library to save and replace certain signal
handlers during the execution of library code and to restore them afterwards.
.TP
\fB\-\-show\-all\fP [\fB\-S\fP]
[\fBSHOWALL\fP]  Equivalent to the \fB\-\-show\-free\fP, \fB\-\-show\-freed\fP,
\fB\-\-show\-unfreed\fP, \fB\-\-show\-map\fP and \fB\-\-show\-symbols\fP options
specified together.
.TP
\fB\-\-show\-env\fP [\fB\-E\fP]
Displays the contents of the \fBMPATROL_OPTIONS\fP environment variable.  This
will be shown after all of the other command line options have been processed
and will prevent the specified command from being run.
.TP
\fB\-\-show\-free\fP
[\fBSHOWFREE\fP]  Specifies that a summary of all of the free memory blocks
should be displayed at the end of program execution.
.TP
\fB\-\-show\-freed\fP
[\fBSHOWFREED\fP]  Specifies that a summary of all of the freed memory
allocations should be displayed at the end of program execution.
.TP
\fB\-\-show\-map\fP
[\fBSHOWMAP\fP]  Specifies that a memory map of the entire heap should be
displayed at the end of program execution.
.TP
\fB\-\-show\-symbols\fP
[\fBSHOWSYMBOLS\fP]  Specifies that a summary of all of the function symbols
read from the program's executable file should be displayed at the end of
program execution.
.TP
\fB\-\-show\-unfreed\fP
[\fBSHOWUNFREED\fP]  Specifies that a summary of all of the unfreed memory
allocations should be displayed at the end of program execution.
.TP
\fB\-\-small\-bound\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP>
[\fBSMALLBOUND\fP]  Specifies the limit in bytes up to which memory allocations
should be classified as small allocations for profiling purposes.
.TP
\fB\-\-threads\fP [\fB\-j\fP]
Specifies that the program to be run is multithreaded if the \fB\-\-dynamic\fP
option is used.  This option is required if the multithreaded version of the
mpatrol library should be preloaded instead of the normal version.
.TP
\fB\-\-trace\fP [\fB\-t\fP]
Specifies that all memory allocations are to be traced and sent to the tracing
output file.
.TP
\fB\-\-trace\-file\fP <\fIstring\fP> [\fB\-T\fP]
Specifies an alternative file in which to place all memory allocation tracing
information from the mpatrol library.
.TP
\fB\-\-unfreed\-abort\fP <\fIunsigned integer\fP> [\fB\-U\fP]
[\fBUNFREEDABORT\fP]  Specifies the minimum number of unfreed allocations at
which to abort the program just before program termination.
.TP
\fB\-\-use\-debug\fP [\fB\-g\fP]
[\fBUSEDEBUG\fP]  Specifies that any debugging information in the executable
file should be used to obtain additional source-level information.
.TP
\fB\-\-use\-mmap\fP [\fB\-m\fP]
[\fBUSEMMAP\fP]  Specifies that the library should use \fBmmap()\fP instead of
\fBsbrk()\fP to allocate user memory.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fP [\fB\-V\fP]
Displays the version number of the \fBmpatrol\fP command.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmprof\fP(1), \fBmptrace\fP(1), \fBmleak\fP(1), \fBmpsym\fP(1),
\fBmpedit\fP(1), \fBhexwords\fP(1), \fBlibmpatrol\fP(3), \fBlibmpalloc\fP(3).
.PP
The mpatrol manual and reference card.
.PP
http://www.cbmamiga.demon.co.uk/mpatrol/
.SH AUTHOR
Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.PP
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.
.PP
This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Library General Public License for more
details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public License
along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
