.\" mpatrol
.\" A library for controlling and tracing dynamic memory allocations.
.\" Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.\"
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Library General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License along with this library; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston,
.\" MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" UNIX Manual Page
.\"
.\" $Id: mprof.1,v 1.17 2002/01/08 20:28:41 graeme Exp $
.\"
.TH MPROF 1 "8 January 2002" "Release 1.4" "mpatrol library"
.SH NAME
mprof \- displays profiling information produced by the mpatrol library
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmprof\fP [\fIoptions\fP] [\fIfile\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBmprof\fP command is a tool designed to read a profiling output file
produced by the mpatrol library and display the profiling information that
was obtained.  The profiling information includes summaries of all of the
memory allocations listed by size and the function that allocated them and a
list of memory leaks with the call stack of the allocating function.  It also
includes a graph of all memory allocations listed in tabular form, and an
optional graph specification file for later processing by the \fBdot\fP graph
visualisation package.
.PP
When the \fBPROF\fP option is used with the mpatrol library, statistics for
all dynamic memory allocations and deallocations are written to a profiling
output file.  The name of this file can be changed with the \fBPROFFILE\fP
option and the frequency at which the file is written can be specified with
the \fBAUTOSAVE\fP option.  The bounds for small allocations, medium
allocations, large allocations and extra large allocations can be set with
the \fBSMALLBOUND\fP, \fBMEDIUMBOUND\fP and \fBLARGEBOUND\fP options.
.PP
Only allocations and deallocations are recorded, with each reallocation being
treated as a deallocation immediately followed by an allocation.  For full
memory allocation profiling support, call stack traversal must be supported in
the mpatrol library and all of the program's symbols must have been successfully
read by the mpatrol library before the program was run.  The \fBmprof\fP command
will attempt to compensate if either of these requirements are not met, but the
displayed tables may contain less meaningful information.
.PP
The \fIfile\fP argument must be a valid mpatrol profiling output filename but
if \fIfile\fP is omitted then \fBmprof\fP will use \fImpatrol.out\fP as the
name of the profiling output file to use.  If \fIfile\fP is given as \fI\-\fP
then the standard input file stream will be used as the profiling output file.
.PP
Much of the functionality of this tool is based upon \fBmprof\fP by Benjamin
Zorn and Paul Hilfinger, which was written as a research project and ran on
MIPS, SPARC and VAX machines.  However, the profiling output files are
incompatible, the tables displayed have a different format, and the way they
are implemented is entirely different.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-addresses\fP [\fB\-a\fP]
Specifies that different call sites from within the same function are to be
differentiated and that the names of all functions should be displayed with
their call site offset in bytes.  This affects the direct allocation and
memory leak tables, as well as the allocation call graph and the graph
specification file.
.TP
\fB\-\-call\-graph\fP [\fB\-v\fP]
Specifies that the allocation call graph should be displayed.  This is not
displayed by default as it can get very large for even a moderately sized
profiling output file.
.TP
\fB\-\-counts\fP [\fB\-c\fP]
Specifies that certain tables should be sorted by the number of allocations or
deallocations rather than the total number of bytes allocated or deallocated.
This affects the direct allocation and memory leak tables, as well as the
allocation call graph and the graph specification file.
.TP
\fB\-\-graph\-file\fP \fIfile\fP [\fB\-g\fP]
Specifies that the allocation call graph should also be written to a graph
specification file for later visualisation with \fBdot\fP.  If \fIfile\fP is
given as \fIstdout\fP or \fIstderr\fP then the corresponding file stream will
be used as the target for the graph specification file.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fP [\fB\-h\fP]
Displays a quick-reference option summary.
.TP
\fB\-\-leaks\fP [\fB\-l\fP]
Specifies that memory leaks rather than memory allocations are to be written to
the graph specification file.  This option only affects the output from the
\fB\-\-graph\-file\fP option.
.TP
\fB\-\-stack\-depth\fP \fIdepth\fP [\fB\-n\fP]
Specifies the maximum stack depth to use when calculating if one call site has
the same call stack as another call site.  This also specifies the maximum
number of functions to display in a call stack.  If \fIdepth\fP is \fI0\fP then
the call stack depth will be unlimited in size.  The default call stack depth
is \fI1\fP.  This affects the memory leak table.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fP [\fB\-V\fP]
Displays the version number of the \fBmprof\fP command.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmpatrol\fP(1), \fBmptrace\fP(1), \fBmleak\fP(1), \fBmpsym\fP(1),
\fBmpedit\fP(1), \fBhexwords\fP(1), \fBprof\fP(1), \fBgprof\fP(1), \fBdot\fP(1),
\fBlibmpatrol\fP(3), \fBlibmpalloc\fP(3).
.PP
The mpatrol manual and reference card.
.PP
http://www.cbmamiga.demon.co.uk/mpatrol/
.SH AUTHOR
Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.PP
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.
.PP
This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Library General Public License for more
details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public License
along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
