.\" mpatrol
.\" A library for controlling and tracing dynamic memory allocations.
.\" Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.\"
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Library General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License along with this library; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston,
.\" MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" UNIX Manual Page
.\"
.\" $Id: mpsym.1,v 1.13 2002/01/08 20:28:41 graeme Exp $
.\"
.TH MPSYM 1 "8 January 2002" "Release 1.4" "mpatrol library"
.SH NAME
mpsym \- locates missing symbolic information in an mpatrol log file
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmpsym\fP [\fIoptions\fP] [\fIprogfile\fP [\fIlogfile\fP]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBmpsym\fP command is used to parse a log file produced by the mpatrol
library and uses a debugger to append symbol names and source level information
to code addresses in stack tracebacks.  This should be used if the
\fBUSEDEBUG\fP option is not supported on a particular platform or does not work
properly with a specific program.  It will replace all existing symbols and
source level information associated with the stack tracebacks in the mpatrol log
file and will display the resulting log file on the standard output file stream.
.PP
The \fIprogfile\fP argument must be the filename of the executable file that
produced the mpatrol log file but if \fIprogfile\fP is omitted then \fBmpsym\fP
will use \fIa.out\fP as the name of the executable file to use.  The \fBmpsym\fP
command will read the symbol table and debugging sections from this file in
order to map the code addresses that appear in the mpatrol log file into symbol
names and source level information.  If the executable file does not contain a
symbol table then no symbol names will be available and if it does not contain
the appropriate debugging sections then no source level information will be
available either.  Obviously, if the executable file is not the same as the one
that created the mpatrol log file then the final output will be wrong.
.PP
The \fIlogfile\fP argument must be a valid mpatrol log filename but if
\fIlogfile\fP is omitted then \fBmpsym\fP will use \fImpatrol.log\fP as the
name of the log file to use, or \fIprogfile.log\fP if it can't find that.  The
\fBmpsym\fP command makes two passes over the log file so the file must be
randomly-accessable.
.PP
The \fBmpsym\fP command currently uses \fBgdb\fP as the debugger with which to
obtain the additional information about the code addresses in the mpatrol log
file.  It also makes use of several UNIX text processing commands, including
\fBperl\fP if it is installed, in order to extract information from the
debugger's output and from the log file.  As a result, the \fBmpsym\fP command
is only likely to work on UNIX platforms or on systems which have the necessary
commands installed.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fP [\fB\-h\fP]
Displays a quick-reference option summary.
.TP
\fB\-\-skip\fP [\fB\-s\fP]
Skip symbols marked as \fI???\fP in the log file.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fP [\fB\-V\fP]
Displays the version number of the \fBmpsym\fP command.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmpatrol\fP(1), \fBmprof\fP(1), \fBmptrace\fP(1), \fBmleak\fP(1),
\fBmpedit\fP(1), \fBhexwords\fP(1), \fBgdb\fP(1), \fBperl\fP(1),
\fBlibmpatrol\fP(3), \fBlibmpalloc\fP(3).
.PP
The mpatrol manual and reference card.
.PP
http://www.cbmamiga.demon.co.uk/mpatrol/
.SH AUTHOR
Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.PP
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.
.PP
This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Library General Public License for more
details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public License
along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
