.\" mpatrol
.\" A library for controlling and tracing dynamic memory allocations.
.\" Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.\"
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Library General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License along with this library; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston,
.\" MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" UNIX Manual Page
.\"
.\" $Id: mptrace.1,v 1.13 2002/01/08 20:28:41 graeme Exp $
.\"
.TH MPTRACE 1 "8 January 2002" "Release 1.4" "mpatrol library"
.SH NAME
mptrace \- displays tracing information produced by the mpatrol library
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmptrace\fP [\fIoptions\fP] [\fIfile\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBmptrace\fP command is a tool designed to read a tracing output file
produced by the mpatrol library and display the tracing information that was
obtained.  The tracing information is a concise encoded trace of all of the
memory allocation events that occurred during a program's execution, and can be
decoded into tabular or graphical form, along with any relevant statistics that
can be calculated.
.PP
When the \fBTRACE\fP option is used with the mpatrol library, statistics for all
dynamic memory allocations, reallocations and deallocations are written to a
tracing output file.  The name of this file can be changed with the
\fBTRACEFILE\fP option.
.PP
Only allocations, reallocations and deallocations are recorded.  The intention
of tracing is to gather concise details about each memory allocation event
rather than complete information about some or all memory allocations.  As a
result, the mpatrol log files and profiling output files contain more detailed
information about individual memory allocations, whereas the tracing output
files contain a broader view of allocation behaviour throughout the entire
program.
.PP
The \fIfile\fP argument must be a valid mpatrol tracing output filename but if
\fIfile\fP is omitted then \fBmptrace\fP will use \fImpatrol.trace\fP as the
name of the tracing output file to use.  If \fIfile\fP is given as \fI\-\fP then
the standard input file stream will be used as the tracing output file.
.PP
A C source file containing a trace-driven memory allocation simulation program
can be written with the \fB\-\-sim\-file\fP option.  This program will have the
identical memory allocation behaviour to the program which produced the original
trace file.  This option can be useful to use if you wish to determine which
malloc library is most suitable to use for a specific application.
.PP
A trace file in Heap Allocation Trace Format (HATF) can also be written out by
the \fBmptrace\fP command by using the \fB\-\-hatf\-file\fP option.  It takes
the name of the HATF trace file to be written as an argument and writes out the
HATF version of the mpatrol tracing output file given as input when it is being
processed.  The HATF file format is an attempt to standardise trace file formats
for memory allocation tracing, and is being developed by Benjamin Zorn and
Richard Jones.  There is a HATF DTD located in the \fIextra\fP directory in the
mpatrol distribution.
.PP
The \fBmptrace\fP command will normally be built with GUI support on UNIX
platforms that are running X Windows.  This means that a graphical memory map
display of the heap will be shown in a window every time \fBmptrace\fP is run
with the \fB\-\-gui\fP option.  This display is updated every time a new event
is read from the tracing output file and by default uses the colour red for
internal heap memory (used by the mpatrol library), blue for unallocated heap
memory, black for allocated memory and white for free memory.  Options exist to
change this colour scheme, as well as the dimensions of the drawing area and the
window.
.PP
By default, it is assumed that the start address of the first event that appears
in the tracing output file is the base address of the memory map displayed in
the window.  If the heap grows downwards then this assumption will be incorrect
(since nothing will be displayed) and so the \fB\-\-base\fP option must be used
to specify a reasonable lower bound for the final memory map.  In addition, the
visible address space displayed in the memory map is fixed to a certain size (4
megabytes by default), but this can be changed with the \fB\-\-space\fP option.
A small delay can also be added after drawing each memory allocation event
through the use of the \fB\-\-delay\fP option.
.PP
Note that any options that are specific to the GUI version of \fBmptrace\fP are
read by the X command line parser rather than directly by \fBmptrace\fP.  As a
result they are parsed according to X toolkit rules and do not appear in the
quick-reference option summary produced by the \fB\-\-help\fP option.  The
application class for setting \fBmptrace\fP X resources is called \fIMPTrace\fP.
.PP
The idea for graphically displaying a memory map of the heap comes from the
\fBxmem\fP tool supplied with the University of Toronto Computer Systems
Research Institute malloc library, written by Mark Moraes.  However, the
documentation for that tool remarks that it was written as a quick and dirty
hack.  The \fBmptrace\fP command is hopefully more stable and contains a lot
more functionality.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-gui\fP [\fB\-w\fP]
Displays the GUI (if supported).
.TP
\fB\-\-hatf\-file\fP \fIfile\fP [\fB\-H\fP]
Specifies that the trace should also be written to a file in Heap Allocation
Trace Format (HATF).
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fP [\fB\-h\fP]
Displays a quick-reference option summary.
.TP
\fB\-\-sim\-file\fP \fIfile\fP [\fB\-S\fP]
Specifies that a trace-driven memory allocation simulation program written in C
should be written to a file.
.TP
\fB\-\-source\fP [\fB\-s\fP]
Displays source-level information for each event in the tracing table, if
available.
.TP
\fB\-\-verbose\fP [\fB\-v\fP]
Specifies that the tracing table should be displayed.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fP [\fB\-V\fP]
Displays the version number of the \fBmptrace\fP command.
.SH GUI OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-alloc\fP \fIcolour\fP
Specifies the colour to use for displaying allocated memory.  The default colour
is \fIblack\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-base\fP \fIaddress\fP
Specifies the base address of the visible address space displayed in the memory
map.  The default address is calculated at run-time from the start address of
the first memory allocation event in the tracing output file.
.TP
\fB\-\-delay\fP \fIlength\fP
Specifies that a small delay of a certain length should be added after drawing
each memory allocation event.  The delay does not correspond to a specific unit
of time, but experimentation with the length should yield satisfactory results.
The default delay is \fI0\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-free\fP \fIcolour\fP
Specifies the colour to use for displaying free memory.  The default colour is
\fIwhite\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-height\fP \fIsize\fP
Specifies the height (in pixels) of the drawing area.  The default height is
\fI512\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-internal\fP \fIcolour\fP
Specifies the colour to use for displaying internal heap memory.  The default
colour is \fIred\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-space\fP \fIsize\fP
Specifies the size (in megabytes) of the visible address space displayed in the
memory map.  The default size is \fI4\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-unalloc\fP \fIcolour\fP
Specifies the colour to use for displaying unallocated heap memory.  The default
colour is \fIblue\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-view\-height\fP \fIsize\fP
Specifies the height (in pixels) of the window.  The default height is
\fI256\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-view\-width\fP \fIsize\fP
Specifies the width (in pixels) of the window.  The default width is \fI256\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-width\fP \fIsize\fP
Specifies the width (in pixels) of the drawing area.  The default width is
\fI512\fP.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmpatrol\fP(1), \fBmprof\fP(1), \fBmleak\fP(1), \fBmpsym\fP(1),
\fBmpedit\fP(1), \fBhexwords\fP(1), \fBX\fP(1), \fBlibmpatrol\fP(3),
\fBlibmpalloc\fP(3).
.PP
The mpatrol manual and reference card.
.PP
http://www.cbmamiga.demon.co.uk/mpatrol/
.SH AUTHOR
Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.PP
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.
.PP
This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Library General Public License for more
details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public License
along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
