.\" mpatrol
.\" A library for controlling and tracing dynamic memory allocations.
.\" Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.\"
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Library General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License along with this library; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston,
.\" MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" UNIX Manual Page
.\"
.\" $Id: libmpalloc.3,v 1.4 2002/01/08 20:28:42 graeme Exp $
.\"
.TH LIBMPALLOC 3 "8 January 2002" "Release 1.4" "mpatrol library"
.SH NAME
libmpalloc \- dynamic memory allocation replacement library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
#include <mpalloc.h>

void *MP_MALLOC(void *ptr, size_t count, typename type);
void *MP_CALLOC(void *ptr, size_t count, typename type);
char *MP_STRDUP(char *ptr, const char *str);
void *MP_REALLOC(void *ptr, size_t count, typename type);
void MP_FREE(void *ptr);
__mp_failhandler MP_FAILURE(__mp_failhandler func);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fImpalloc library\fP contains release implementations of all of the mpatrol
library functions, with all of its checking, debugging and tracing features
disabled.  It is fully link-compatible with the mpatrol library and so can be
linked in instead of the mpatrol library in order to quickly disable all of its
features without requiring a complete recompilation of all of the source files
in a project.  It also contains implementations of the \fBMP_MALLOC\fP family
of functions that can be used in a release environment.
.PP
All of the function definitions in \fImpatrol.h\fP can be disabled by defining
the \fBNDEBUG\fP preprocessor macro, which is the same macro used to control
the behaviour of the \fBassert\fP function.  If \fBNDEBUG\fP is defined then
no macro redefinition of functions will take place and all special mpatrol
library functions will evaluate to empty statements.  The \fImpalloc.h\fP header
file will also be included in this case.  It is intended that the \fBNDEBUG\fP
preprocessor macro be defined in release builds.
.PP
The mpalloc library contains functional replacements for all of the mpatrol
library's dynamic memory allocation and memory operation functions, mainly for
use in situations where not all of the source files in a project have been
recompiled with the \fBNDEBUG\fP preprocessor macro in order to remove mpatrol.
However, not all of these functions can be fully implemented using ANSI C and so
may contain some limitations.  The only recommended solution for a final release
is to perform a complete recompile with \fBNDEBUG\fP defined.
.SH FUNCTIONS
The following 6 functions are provided as convenient alternatives to the ANSI C
dynamic memory allocation functions (although \fBstrdup\fP is not strictly an
ANSI C function).  They are implemented as preprocessor macro functions which
may evaluate their arguments more than once, so extra care should be taken to
avoid passing arguments with side-effects.  None of the functions return
\fBNULL\fP if no memory is available and instead abort the program with a useful
error message indicating where the call to allocate memory came from and what
was being allocated.  To use these you should include the \fImpalloc.h\fP header
file:
.TP
\fBMP_MALLOC\fP
Allocates \fIcount\fP uninitialised items of type \fItype\fP from the heap, sets
\fIptr\fP to the result and returns a suitably-cast pointer to the first item of
the allocation.  The pointer returned will be suitably aligned for holding items
of type \fItype\fP.  If \fIcount\fP is \fI0\fP then it will be implicitly
rounded up to \fI1\fP.  If there is not enough space in the heap then the
program will be aborted after calling the allocation failure handler, which by
default writes an appropriate error message to the standard error file stream.
The allocated memory in \fIptr\fP must be deallocated with \fBMP_FREE\fP or
reallocated with \fBMP_REALLOC\fP.
.TP
\fBMP_CALLOC\fP
Allocates \fIcount\fP zero-initialised items of type \fItype\fP from the heap,
sets \fIptr\fP to the result and returns a suitably-cast pointer to the first
item of the allocation.  The pointer returned will be suitably aligned for
holding items of type \fItype\fP.  If \fIcount\fP is \fI0\fP then it will be
implicitly rounded up to \fI1\fP.  If there is not enough space in the heap then
the program will be aborted after calling the allocation failure handler, which
by default writes an appropriate error message to the standard error file
stream.  The allocated memory in \fIptr\fP must be deallocated with
\fBMP_FREE\fP or reallocated with \fBMP_REALLOC\fP.
.TP
\fBMP_STRDUP\fP
Allocates exactly enough memory from the heap to duplicate \fIstr\fP (including
the terminating nul character), sets \fIptr\fP to the result and returns a
suitably-cast pointer to the first byte of the allocation after copying
\fIstr\fP to the newly-allocated memory.  The pointer returned will have no
alignment constraints and can be used to store character data up to the length
of \fIstr\fP.  If there is not enough space in the heap then the program will be
aborted after calling the allocation failure handler, which by default writes an
appropriate error message to the standard error file stream.  The allocated
memory in \fIptr\fP must be deallocated with \fBMP_FREE\fP or reallocated with
\fBMP_REALLOC\fP.
.TP
\fBMP_REALLOC\fP
Resizes the memory allocation beginning at \fIptr\fP to \fIcount\fP items of
type \fItype\fP and returns a suitably-cast pointer to the first item of the new
allocation after copying \fIptr\fP to the newly-allocated memory, which will be
truncated if \fIcount\fP is smaller than the original number of items.  The
pointer returned will be suitably aligned for holding items of type \fItype\fP.
If \fIptr\fP is \fBNULL\fP then the call will be equivalent to \fBMP_MALLOC\fP.
If \fIcount\fP is \fI0\fP then it will be implicitly rounded up to \fI1\fP.  If
\fIcount\fP is greater than the original number of items then the extra space
will be filled with uninitialised bytes.  If there is not enough space in the
heap then the program will be aborted after calling the allocation failure
handler, which by default writes an appropriate error message to the standard
error file stream.  The allocated memory must be deallocated with \fBMP_FREE\fP
and can be reallocated again with \fBMP_REALLOC\fP.
.TP
\fBMP_FREE\fP
Frees the memory allocation beginning at \fIptr\fP so the memory can be reused
by another call to allocate memory, and sets \fIptr\fP to \fBNULL\fP after
freeing the memory.  If \fIptr\fP is \fBNULL\fP then no memory will be freed.
.TP
\fBMP_FAILURE\fP
Installs an allocation failure handler specifically for use with
\fBMP_MALLOC\fP, \fBMP_CALLOC\fP, \fBMP_STRDUP\fP and \fBMP_REALLOC\fP and
returns a pointer to the previously installed handler, normally the default
handler if no handler had been previously installed.  This will be called by
the above functions when there is not enough space in the heap for them to
satisfy their allocation request.  The default allocation failure handler will
terminate the program after writing an error message to the standard error file
stream indicating where the original allocation request took place and what was
being allocated.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmpatrol\fP(1), \fBmprof\fP(1), \fBmptrace\fP(1), \fBmleak\fP(1),
\fBmpsym\fP(1), \fBmpedit\fP(1), \fBhexwords\fP(1), \fBlibmpatrol\fP(3),
\fBmalloc\fP(3), \fBassert\fP(3).
.PP
The mpatrol manual and reference card.
.PP
http://www.cbmamiga.demon.co.uk/mpatrol/
.SH AUTHOR
Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 1997-2002 Graeme S. Roy <graeme.roy@analog.com>
.PP
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.
.PP
This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Library General Public License for more
details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public License
along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
